Testing one, two, three. Testing one, two, three.
All right. Dr. Gage, would you please tell us a
little about yourself, your early origins, and
how you came to be a Texas Aggie? Well, I was born and
reared in the hill country in a small town called
San Saba. And no one from either side of my family
had ever gone to college. When I was in junior high,
I was on a 4-H judging team. And we came to 4-H
Roundup and the state contest here. And that was my
first exposure ever to a college or university
campus. But it planted a seed very clearly in my
mind. And I was always very inquisitive. had as a
child gone out to a shed behind the house and played
the mad scientist and had dreams of discovering
something through research and
experimentation. You had a chemistry set. I had a
chemistry set and made my own chemistry set by Oh,
different concoctions that I would mix up and try
to poison red ants, quite honestly. Well, if you
had found that, you really would have been a major
inventor. I might have had a patent and been able to
retire. And from then on, being reared on a small
farm and ranch, had a very close tie to animals and
to veterinary medicine. And decided that, and
then through high school, that I wanted to study
veterinary medicine. But I had always, since
junior high, been in leadership positions. And
through high school, and even held some state
offices. So there was, from the very beginning, a
real interest in my life always to take a
leadership role. But I knew that college
education was absolutely essential. And I worked
my way through college with the help of my parents,
starting first at Tarleton for one year, mainly
due to the fact that I got a couple of scholarships
that made a big impact and difference. And we were
from a very poor family. And then the next year, I
transferred to A&M. knowing that it was the only
veterinary college and clearly where I wanted to
go from the beginning and would have come here as a
freshman had I been able to have additional
scholarship help. I was one of the fortunate
people who got into veterinary college in two
years. Where? What year was that? That was in 1962
was my first year on this campus. which would have
been then my second year of pre-veterinary
medical work. Then I entered veterinary college
in the fall of 1963. We were in, or the veterinary
college was on a three-year, year-round
curriculum. So I could get a doctor of veterinary
medicine degree in three years, but it meant going
the total summer because it was really three
semesters compacted into a total year schedule.
And I recall that we had a couple of semesters in
which we had 39 contact hours in class and
laboratory per week. So it was rigorous. That's
tough. But as I look back, I'm grateful for that
opportunity because I was able to get an
undergraduate and a doctor's degree in a total of
only five years. Very good. And it added at least
two years to my productive career. So I graduated
in 1966
with my doctor of veterinary medicine degree and
that was in August because we were on that kind of a
time schedule. And ten days later, I started a
post-doctoral residency and graduate program in
neurosurgery at Auburn University. Okay. And
found myself also teaching veterinary students
who were older than I because they had, in most
cases, a four-year undergraduate, and then they
were in their fourth year of veterinary college.
How did you get into neurosurgery? That was brand
new. It was brand new and was fortuitous for me
because it was at the same time that a lot of the
sophistication of human medicine was being
applied to veterinary medicine and the public was
willing and able to pay for it. And Auburn had a
great reputation for their neurosurgery and had
the premier small animal neurosurgeon in the
nation. Did anyone here encourage you in that
direction? I had encouragement from two surgeons
here. And I had an opportunity to either go to
Auburn or to Colorado State. And I had really
become excited during veterinary college about
surgery because it was kind of a challenge. There
are no two cases alike. There's a lot of excitement
in it. And I found that I also had good surgical
skills. And when the opportunity then at Auburn
presented itself, I left in 1966 and completed a
master's in residency and became board certified
as a diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Surgeons in neurosurgery. I
taught... Which was probably a rare... Rare Beast
at the time. It was and taught one quarter. They
were on a quarter system at Auburn and then in March
of 1969 I was given an opportunity to come back to
Texas A&M as assistant professor and at the time
they had no neurosurgeon and it was almost like
handing me an opportunity on a platter to develop a
complete specialty in that discipline. Now they
had a neurologist and I had done a great deal of work
also in neurophysiology. Who was the
neurologist? Dr. Charles Hall, who is still on
faculty. So he and I really formed a team and he
handled the neurology cases and I did all the
neurosurgery. And I was here from 74 to 82
and was promoted to associate professor after
only, I think, two years as assistant professor
here. And during my tenure here in that position, I
had the opportunity to really travel the world in
presenting seminars and continuing education
programs on the new techniques in surgery. I had
the opportunity to do a lot of the pioneering work
in neurosurgery. Who sponsored that? Was that
through the U.S. government programs? No, a lot of
it. would be through the professional
associations. And the American Veterinary
Medical Association, the American Animal
Hospital Association, and then many other
professional groups throughout the country. And
the opportunities to present some of the new
surgical techniques that we were performing in
the dog Before I quit surgery and entered
administration, I did over 1,500 spinal
procedures, predominantly for slipped discs and
broken backs, spinal fractures, in which the
animal would be paraplegic. And unlike the human,
where they're often placed in a wheelchair,
that's not a viable option for an animal. I had a
friend who had a dog like that. Well, if we could do
them early, yeah. I got many of them to walk again,
and that was so gratifying. I did a great deal of
brain surgery in the dog for tumors, for
fractures, and also birth. problem, congenital
problem, called hydrocephalus, which is water on
the brain. And I would use the same... Can you
detect that at birth? Can you? And I would use the
same system that's used in the human infant, which
is to insert a tube into the chamber of the brain
that collected the excess fluid, and it drains
with a one-way pump down into the heart. And that
was exciting to see the results. And then in 1974
I was given an opportunity at a young age of only 32
to become professor and head of the Department of
Urban Practice in the new College of Veterinary
Medicine at the University of Tennessee. And I
will never forget, I got a call from a man named W.W.
Armstead who had at one time been dean of vet med
here. He had gone to Michigan State and he had
called me at Michigan State and I was in surgery lab
and they called me out of lab and I went down to my
office and took the call and he said, I don't know
whether you've heard but I'm going to become the
dean of a new college of veterinary medicine that
we're going to start at the University of
Tennessee. And I'd like to know if you'd have
interest in becoming head of the Department of
Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, which we're
going to call urban practice. Well, you know, at my
young age, I thought I'd be delighted to talk to you
about it because I still had that interest in
academic administration. And even when I went
through veterinary college, I looked up to Al
Price who was the dean at the time and thought one
day I'd like to do that. And my wife and I visited
with him in Denver, Colorado at the American
Veterinary Medical Association and then we flew
up in August of that year and interviewed at UT
Knoxville and during the time before we went I kept
thinking well I wonder how many people are going to
interview and you know they're probably going to
look at full professors and people who have been
out there a long time and lo and behold during the
interview I was offered the job. Yeah I haven't, I
don't know Armistead I don't believe but I have
heard a lot about him and I have a feeling that's the
way he works. He's a fantastic administrator. He
knew what he was going to do before he did it. And he
offered us the job on the spot. And I thought, well,
we're not going to accept or he'll think I'm too
eager. And we'll get home and think about it. You
were really being nervy. So about two days later, I
called him back. And we accepted. And I was the
first person to join him after he went there as
dean. And we went in November the 1st of 1974. And we
were there eight years and built the complete
program. I was responsible for that academic
program and department. And then I was
responsible for construction of all the
facilities, which in today's funding level would
be probably close to a $50 million project. Who was
president of Tennessee at that time? It doesn't
matter. Jack Williams had been there. Yeah, he was
not there. Ed
Bowling was president of the system. I can't
recall. He was a historian, though. Yeah, that's
what I was thinking, too. I guess vaguely in my
mind, but I can't remember who it was. It seemed
like his first name was Jack. I can't recall what
his first name was. But it was a tremendous
administrative experience for me. Were you back
in surgery, too, at the same time? No, I pretty well
gave up surgery to devote almost full time then to
administration and to start a new program from
ground zero and to hire every faculty member. I
would say you did the hiring. That's exciting. To
devise a brand new curriculum from scratch It was,
for my age, just a unique experience. And to work
with the state legislature, with the system, the
university system, to work within the largest
university of 30,000 student enrollment there,
and to have that kind of a opportunity is really an
administrative experience that few people ever
have. Sure, that's right. And I have the greatest
admiration for Armistead. He was a true statesman
and one of the most astute administrators I have
ever worked with and efficient. And then in 1982, I
was contacted about the associate dean for
academic and clinical programs here. And after
eight years, I thrive on challenges, and I needed a
new challenge. It was ready, and it was an
advancement. So I took the position here. Was he
coming back home, too? Did that have anything to do
with it? Absolutely. My own alma mater and home.
And who was Dean? George Shelton. Shelton, okay.
Had you known him before? Not really. I had only
known him by meeting at professional meetings on a
national basis. And I had served as a consultant
though here to the professional curricula
revision because we had put a new curriculum in
place which a lot of people were looking at at the
time. So I did have an opportunity to come back
periodically, and I think that that is one reason
that they were looking at me very specifically. So
what they did, they really combined two
responsibilities. I had oversight for the
veterinary teaching hospital as well as all of the
academic and student programs in the college. In
fact, now they have three associate deans. That's
what happens, doesn't it? For the one position I
had. Always happens that way. And I had great
opportunities under George because he was such a
delegating individual, and I had... a lot of
wonderful growing opportunities in that role. I
liked him. I got to know him somehow or other along
the way. He was a true gentleman. In fact, I told him
once he was too nice to be a dean. That's right.
Probably so. And in that role, I really had some
opportunities to serve on a large number of
university-wide committees. And it gave me, I
think, a growing opportunity for growth in my own
capabilities and the contacts and the kinds of
responsibilities on a university-wide basis.
Yeah, because really at that time, I think the
College of Veterinary Medicine was sort of
isolated from the main university. It was, very
much. And people on the campus really didn't think
much about your participation. And I think that we
really made strides to bring the college back into
the mainstream, and particularly with the growth
of the undergraduate program in the college. And
then in 1989, I had conversation with Bill Mobley
about a position in the president's office as
chief of staff and executive assistant to the
president. And after having served from 82 to 89,
again, I was really looking toward upper
administration, which was truly my long-term
goal. Were you out of the classroom? Yes, totally.
I would do guest lecturing and did some lectures on
professional ethics, on stress and time
management for the professional. And I would, on a
few occasions, give some neurosurgery lectures
on one or two subjects but very, very little. And so
in 89 I moved to the president's office and of
course that was a tremendous time of growth and
expansion of my administrative horizons. I was in
charge also of all state affairs and the
legislative process. Now, I had done that in the
veterinary college for each biennium because we
had a separate line item budget. In fact, I had been
a part of moving the veterinary college from
formula to line item funding. So I had already
worked through and knew what the legislative
process was and the legislative appropriations
process. So then I was in charge of it for the whole
university when I became chief of staff. This was
primarily your assignment with Dr. Mobley was to
be the liaison and the anti-man in Austin. And to
serve as the state affairs, and also to serve
liaison to many of the external constituent
groups, the former students, the Mothers Club,
and many others. But he also gave me a large number
of internal assignments, some of which were
partly in the academic side. I had responsibility
for the task force that made the recommendations
in the international program office and the
changes that we implemented there. And there were
others like that.
And that was for the full calendar year of 89 to 90.
And then in January of 90, I was named interim
provost and vice president. And then in July of
that same year, I was named vice president for
academic affairs and provost. And then the title
was changed a year later to senior vice president
and provost.
Of course, that entailed a second administrative
officer in the university and the chief academic
officer with all of the academic programs, all ten
colleges, the two library directors, all of the
academic support areas, the research agenda,
admissions and records all the way to placement.
So these people reported to you first usually
rather than straight to you? All of those reported
to me before coming to the press. And then, of
course, serving in that role, I served as acting
president in his absence. And it was... great
training for where I sit today because really
there were no major surprises in coming to this
office because I had spent a whole year in the
president's office and then in that role so many of
the agenda items were common and we always had a
very close relationship and the president's
executive staff discussed most all the issues
that were before us. Did he have any unique
administrative styles that be singular or
anything I know I know he was really conscious of
the technique and style of management that's
obviously yeah yeah he uh his bag he uh is a very
efficient administrator and uh a very open and
good communicator with clear uh delegation and I
had always told him in both of the tubes positions
that I held with him that when I was given a
responsibility I was just going to do the best that
I could and what I thought was to be done and if there
was something in it that I wasn't doing right or he
wanted change let me know that I wasn't going to
bother him and and that's the kind of freedom that
we had and I think the freedom that we had also was
built upon uh almost identical kinds of work
styles because he and I are very close in work
style, in delegation, and giving a person
responsibility and holding them accountable and
matching the authority with the responsibility.
At this point, did you pretty well pull out of the
Austin scene? Yes. Once I moved to the provost
position, office i really pulled out of being the
lead person in austin but in my role as senior vice
president provost i still had a big involvement
particularly in compiling the legislative
appropriation request our office did that
because most of the budget is from the academic
side So in one sense, I didn't pull out, and I still
had to testify in the hearings, but I wasn't having
to be in Austin, walk in the halls of Austin. And
that was then transferred to a person that he
brought in after me, and that's Ellen Perrone, who
was handling all of our state and federal affairs.
Since, well, 89, 90 and so forth, when you moved
into the... basically university
administration. Have the problems, have the
issues, have the concerns changed in that
relatively short period? Or do you say,
essentially, are we dealing with the same
situations and problems you dealt with when you
walked in the door in any lab or something? No, I
think we're dealing with a number of changing
issues. One has been the continued resource and
funding constraints and very difficult economic
situations. Right. Do you see that improving? I
see it on the horizon of improving, hopefully
within the next biennium or the one following it.
Yeah, that's sort of what Dr. Mogul projected. I
think that there are some positive indicators not
only about the overall economy, but I think the
realization that unless we make the investment in
public and higher ed, that our future is limited as
a competitive economy and society. And more and
more do I see appreciation and a grasp of that
importance by the state leadership and the
general public of the state. It has not come
easily. but it has come through our own efforts of
educating the public as to that importance.
Another issue is before us that will continue to be
before us, and that is the demographic changes,
the ethnic population changes of this state. It's
a sensitive issue. It's one of considerable
debate, has been, will continue to be, But it's one
that we have got to recognize as a part of the
demographic changes of this state. The state
legislature has already begun in its makeup to be
very reflective of the changing population. And
if you look at the projections for the future, very
clearly there will be no ethnic majority in the
state. And we have as a state institution a great
responsibility to educate all of the workforce of
the population of the state for the future. If we
don't, then we will continue to see the welfare
roles increasing and the drain on the economy and
continued needs for additional criminal justice
increases in the prison system. And education is
the basic deterrent and antidote to those. And
we've just absolutely got to intervene and keep
all of the
ethnic groups of the population in the
educational pipeline so that we do educate the
workforce of tomorrow. Now when you say the
educational pipeline, you're talking about the
A&M educational pipeline. I'm talking about even
public schools. We've got close ties now and
intervention programs with the public schools.
to try to keep these kids from dropping out in the
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth grade so that they
at least graduate through high school, and then we
hopefully will have them in junior college and
universities then later. Do you think A&M has some
sort of an advantage or disadvantage in...
diversifying or making this kind of... I think we
have a disadvantage for one reason as far as the
enrollment numbers on this campus and that is that
we do not have our location in a major metropolitan
area. Where there is that diversity. Where there
is that diversity and where there is already that
pool of minorities living at home and who can
attend. We have to recruit them to this location
and for some groups it's even more difficult
because it is a fairly long distance from home so
that works to our disadvantage and we don't have
the numbers within the community to build even a
professional network and that impacts our
ability to recruit faculty and staff and I do think
that it causes us to have to work doubly hard. But
we're making great gains. And we have the largest
minority enrollment this year that we've ever
had. We have a very substantial increase in
Hispanic members. And we've made great gains in
faculty again this year. And I am convinced that we
have now begun to get that base overhead number
that's needed. To build a pool to work from. To
build a pool and to build a network that will help us
in the future. But I think that's going to continue
to be a big issue for this university and all of
them, the universities in the state. I think
funding is going to continue to be one. I think that
the other whole area is that we've got to work on is
the public relations area. There have been a
number of adverse national media accounts of some
improprieties at other institutions and
research funding. of scientific misconduct,
of perhaps not the right communication of faculty
workloads, so that it's created the wrong
impression. Has any of this been directed at A&M
specifically? No, not at all. And that's where
we're fortunate. We are. We have not had any of that
directed at us. Stanford was the first with their
problems in indirect cost. Harvard got into some
difficulties in the scientific misconduct area
and some publicity. And those... That's good that
you're conscious of that because I think that's
been something we've not been very conscious of.
We've been very fortunate here.
I think that... There is no doubt that our current
endowment campaign and the continued efforts in
looking toward external funding from the private
sector is one of our most important priorities for
the future. I think that we will no longer see the
kind of state support that we had enjoyed prior to,
say, 1985. And it behooves us to make sure that we
continue to build public support. Well, that's
one area we certainly have a leg up on. And we
haven't, as all of higher ed, been very effective
in communicating our value and our worth.
Probably not, that's right. And we've had some
lack of communication of what the faculty
workload is and a lot of misperception that
faculty only teach, you know, three hours and
they're through rather than the number of
sections, the number of contact hours, the number
of hours in preparation. and the number of hours in
grading papers and student counseling. We've not
done a good job of communicating that. Do you think
it's going to be more and more conflict over that
kind of issue, which also involves the research?
Absolutely. Absolutely. And do you see us moving
more and more heavily into a research orientation
and to a graduate level? Slowly, because we're a
major research university and now being the
eighth largest university and with... a very
large graduate program, and with the
commitment that we have made in Target 2000 to move
toward 25% graduate professional enrollment, we
will continue to slowly move in that direction.
But at the same time, balancing what I do believe is
our mandated responsibility as a land grant
institution to maintain a very strong and large
undergraduate program that infuses the cutting
edge technology and the research that's being
done into the classroom and continuing to not only
take the top kids from the state, but at the same
time in the land grant mission, taking still some
broad spectrum of students from across the state.
That's good. That's a good point. And that's key to
us. I think in our striving for excellence
sometimes we ignore the realities of the world.
And I think that we've really done that recently
with the new initiatives that fortunately I had
the opportunity of leading in the undergraduate
education programs. where we re-emphasized
teaching. We revamped the Center for Teaching
Excellence. We put the Center for Academic
Enhancement in place, which is somewhat the other
spectrum of the honors program in our National
Merit Scholars to help the kids who are having
trouble making the transition. So we're trying to
look at both sides and both spectrums of the
student capabilities. and about 15 new
initiatives that we actually put in place to
enhance undergraduate. That's actually been the
great strength of A&M through the years. They've
brought people in who had no other opportunities,
and A&M gave them that opportunity. And I think the
other thing that's helped us really
be a leader in this area has been that commitment
and that tradition historically. And the
traditions of this campus, the support of the
former students, and then the some 700 student
organizations on campus that provide leadership
and individual development opportunities
because it creates a family atmosphere. That's a
remarkable environment. I don't think any other
campus has anything like that. And I'll tell you
something that people fail to realize. We
mentioned a moment ago that being in a small
community probably worked against us on having a
higher number of minorities. But at the same time,
it works for us on the retention and... building
the loyalty to the school because we're not in a
major metropolitan area and we become the focus
and we become a family. And when you capture that
and combine it with the traditions, It is what
really, I think, protects and promotes and
enhances the Aggie spirit. Well, what's
remarkable to me is that they've been able to
preserve that aura in spite of the tremendous
growth. Colas and Wires, in my mind, are two of the
great inspirations for keeping that going. You
know, the Corps of Cadets still being prominent
and now growing again. We protect and preserve the
traditions and the history of this university
through those very clearly. The theme of this
revision basically, of course, is change. And I
noticed one of the things you mentioned when you
stepped into this office was that you were
interested in changing or adapting our students
to the new global environment, so how do you see
A&M's mission in the global economy? I think that
we've really got some exciting programs and if you
look at the number of our students involved in
international study abroad experiences and
student exchanges and the number of courses that
we have on campus, We lead the state, and our goal
and priority has been to infuse the international
dimension into all of our academic and student
programs. And that's done through new courses
that have been developed. It's done through study
abroad experiences. It's done through our
campuses in Japan and Italy and now Mexico City.
It's also done... What's going to happen there,
incidentally? In Mexico City? Yeah. It will
provide us an opportunity to continue to build
partnerships and programmatic development
opportunities with institutions in Mexico. A
year-round office or a year-round academic
program? It's a full year-round office, but we
will not teach the courses out of that office.
Except for executive development, business
development kinds of courses. But it serves
really as an office to bring partnerships
together and agreements. We now have some 500
research programs around the world. We have 100
memorandum agreements. with other institutions
across the whole world. And it's just a constant
travel now back and forth of our faculty and
foreign visitors to this campus. And with those
interactions, our students are clearly brought
into contact with the kinds of international
dimension and the globalization that's
occurring on almost a daily basis. It really is.
And then with 2,800 foreign students on this
campus, international students, they rub elbows
with them every day. That makes a difference.
Absolutely. In the environment and
opportunities of the Aggies. And the recruiters
are here on campus telling us that we must prepare
our graduates to be able to function
competitively. in the new global village. So
therefore, that is a reason that we're in Jesus. I
sense that my students in class are actually
becoming a little more conscious of the world than
they were not too long ago. It really is. Very
clearly. Let me ask two more questions, I guess. I
don't want to take up all your lunch date, I know.
What is the enlarging Texas A&M University
system? Is it a blessing or a burden? And then I
guess finally would be your advices for whoever is
in the president's chair. What needs to be done for
the future? Well, I'm strongly supportive of the
expansion that has occurred in the Texas A&M
University system very clearly. this will be the
flagship university within the system and should
be and there needs to be a very clear understanding
that it will serve in that priority role but in that
role there is an enormous expectation that it
serves as a leadership role and its leadership
role should be to help collaboratively and in
partnership with the other institutions in all of
the academic research and extension programs and
I think that it will serve as an opportunity for us
to work in not only research but also in some of the
academic programs with their needs of
development and the needs of development,
particularly in South Texas, and the expertise
and consultation that we can give, I think that we
can benefit by the fact that we should be able to
recruit into our graduate programs students from
their institution, and in turn perhaps even
educate and prepare some of the faculty of the
future.
And that's what the system has always served, like
yourself and Earl Rudder and so many others. No
question.
What was the second part about it? Well, it was a
totally different question, I guess, and that is
what advices would you give to a president of Texas
A&M University? My advice to anyone who serves...
in this role is to, first of all, be a good
communicator. Now, the person has got to have
the kinds of experience and track record in
handling a very large, complex organization And
the person has got to surround him or herself with
the most competent people that they possibly can.
It is too big for any one person. They must develop
the team approach of people who are capable of
handling the areas of assigned responsibility.
The person has got to have a tremendous
organizational and time management ability. and
has got to have a tremendous amount of energy.
Because some of these days are 15, 16 hour days.
They've got to have a vision to see the big picture.
They've got to know what
academic and student and athletic programs mean
to a university. They've also got to be very astute
to the politics
that are involved in dealing with many different
external constituencies will have to be astute to
the state legislature and elected officials and
to build a trust and communication with these
constituencies. No question. No question.
And has I think got to make sure that they stay
closely in communications with the faculty, the
staff, and the students internally. Cannot
become detached. Must know what's going on even
though areas will be delegated. And I think has got
to recognize that there are issues which have to be
faced. And I've made this statement before that
the easiest way to mishandle an issue is to ignore
it. You have to hit them head on and try to come to a
definitive
resolution to each and every one of them. will have
to develop a fairly thick skin. Yeah, I bet.
Because you're going to get a lot of advice from
many people. Inside and out. Inside and out.
And to not only be a good communicator in the public
forum or in the oral forum, but also in writing.
Yeah. Because the letters and memoranda and other
op-eds and pieces of information that go out,
people are going to analyze and evaluate every
word. Yeah, they do. You don't think about that. To
see what the meaning might be behind it. That's
right. And that gets into, I guess, the political
sensitivity and astuteness of what is and is not
said. That's part of it. You have to stop and think
about everything you write. That's right. But
it's an exciting opportunity. I love
administration. It's a challenge and I like to
take on the competition and play to win. And I get
charged up in speaking before alumni groups or
former students and to many of different public
forums. Well, you've got an appreciative
audience. They're really a good audience. And it
really is exciting to do that. I would think this
would be about as good a time to be a president of
Texas A&M as any time we've had in the past. I really
believe that because... It's fortunate that the
direction, I think, is well set. Yes. And I don't
think that it's a time in which the university was
faced with major problems of needing to change
directions, that we're on the upward movement. I
sense that, too. In interviewing Vandenberg,
yourself, Richardson, Mobley, and everyone I've
talked to, there's a consensus there. And that's
where I'm fortunate, because I've been a part of
building... the plan of where we are and where
we're going. Yeah, that's great. I better let you
go, I guess. You've got another point. Well, I've
enjoyed it. Well, I really appreciate it. Well,
you're more than welcome. More than welcome.